[3777] Document MessageComposerView (#3844)
GetStream/stream-chat-android: docusaurus/docs/Android/03-ui/04-message-components/05-message-composer.mdx

# Message Composer

`MessageComposerView` replaces `MessageInputView`, addressing most of its pain-points, including
extensibility, maintainability, etc. Just like the original view, the revamped component allows
users to participate in the chat by sending messages and attachments.

![Message Composer](../../assets/message_composer.png)

Let's see how to integrate the new `MessageComposerView` in your UI.

## Usage

To use `MessageComposerView`, include it in your XML layout.

```xml
<io.getstream.chat.android.ui.message.composer.MessageComposerView
    android:id="@+id/messageComposerView"
    android:layout_width="match_parent"
    android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
```

> The recommended way of setting up `MessageComposerView` is by binding it to a `MessageComposerViewModel`. This will make it fully functional by setting up any necessary listeners and data handling.

Reviewer: is binding it to a `MessageComposerViewModel` instance.
or
is binding it to the `MessageComposerViewModel`.

    val messageListViewModel: MessageListViewModel by viewModels { factory }

    override fun onViewCreated(view: View, savedInstanceState: Bundle?) {
        super.onViewCreated(view, savedInstanceState)
        // Bind MessageComposerViewModel with MessageComposerView
        messageComposerViewModel.bindView(messageComposerView, viewLifecycleOwner)

        // Integrate MessageComposerView with MessageListView
        messageListViewModel.mode.observe(viewLifecycleOwner) {
            when (it) {
                is MessageListViewModel.Mode.Thread -> {
                    messageComposerViewModel.setMessageMode(MessageMode.MessageThread(it.parentMessage))
                }
                is MessageListViewModel.Mode.Normal -> {
                    messageComposerViewModel.leaveThread()
                }
            }
        }
        messageListView.setMessageReplyHandler { _, message ->
            messageComposerViewModel.performMessageAction(Reply(message))
        }
        messageListView.setMessageEditHandler { message ->
            messageComposerViewModel.performMessageAction(Edit(message))
        }
    }
}
```

> In the snippet above, you initialized the composer and integrated it with the `MessageListView` by passing actions from the message list to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the snippet above, you initialize the message composer and integrate it with the `MessageListView` by passing actions from the message list to the composer.
```

        super.onViewCreated(view, savedInstanceState)
        // Bind MessageComposerViewModel with MessageComposerView
        messageComposerViewModel.bindView(messageComposerView, viewLifecycleOwner)

        // Integrate MessageComposerView with MessageListView
        messageListViewModel.mode.observe(viewLifecycleOwner) {
            when (it) {
                is MessageListViewModel.Mode.Thread -> {
                    messageComposerViewModel.setMessageMode(MessageMode.MessageThread(it.parentMessage))
                }
                is MessageListViewModel.Mode.Normal -> {
                    messageComposerViewModel.leaveThread()
                }
            }
        }
        messageListView.setMessageReplyHandler { _, message ->
            messageComposerViewModel.performMessageAction(Reply(message))
        }
        messageListView.setMessageEditHandler { message ->
            messageComposerViewModel.performMessageAction(Edit(message))
        }
    }
}
```

In the snippet above, you initialize the message composer and integrate it with the `MessageListView` by passing actions from the message list to the composer.

> 

Reviewer 2: Before the next heading can we add an image of what the chat fragment provides as UI? I know it's a bit dumb because we have docs on it and the sample, but it will serve as a way to show how it's no different from the InputView

    messageComposerViewModel.dismissMessageActions()
}
messageComposerView.commandsButtonClickListener = {
    messageComposerViewModel.toggleCommandsVisibility()
}
messageComposerView.dismissSuggestionsListener = {
    messageComposerViewModel.dismissSuggestionsPopup()
}
```

Now let's see how to customize the view.

## Customization

`MessageComposerView` can be customized:

- Using XML Attributes
- Using style Transformations
- By overriding content Views

### Using XML Attributes

Many attributes of this View can be configured, like changing its color, the border and the color of the message input, fonts, components visibility, and so on. The full list of available attributes can be found [here](https://github.com/GetStream/stream-chat-android/blob/main/stream-chat-android-ui-components/src/main/res/values/attrs_message_composer_view.xml).

Here's an example of setting a custom attribute:

```xml
<io.getstream.chat.android.ui.message.composer.MessageComposerView
    android:id="@+id/messageComposerView"
    android:layout_width="match_parent"
    android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    app:streamUiMessageComposerMessageInputTextColor="#005AFF"

> />

Reviewer 2: same here, a small image (just the composer) could be good!

```kotlin
TransformStyle.messageComposerStyleTransformer = StyleTransformer { viewStyle ->
    viewStyle.copy(
        messageInputTextStyle = viewStyle.messageInputTextStyle.copy(
            color = ContextCompat.getColor(context, R.color.stream_ui_accent_red)
        )
    )
}
```

:::note 
The transformer should be set before the View is rendered to make sure that the new style was applied.
:::

## Overriding Content Views

With the new `MessageComposerView` you can replace certain parts of the layout with custom content views. There are several parts available for customization.

* **Leading content**: Represents the left part with integration buttons.
* **Center content**: Represents the center part with the text input. 
* **Trailing content**: Represents the right part with the send button.
* **Header content**: Represents the top part with the action mode title.
* **Footer content**: Represents the bottom part with the "also send to channel" checkbox.
* **Command suggestions content**: Represents the content inside the command suggestions popup.

> * **Mention suggestions content**: Represents the context inside the mention suggestions popup.

Reviewer 2: typo (context)
